---
layout: post
title: Ode to others
tags: [reliance, dependence, contributions]
---

>…even with the most strenuous attentiveness and distinctness that understanding may ever add, we can achieve only cognition of appearances, never of things in themselves.
>
>~Kant, The Groundworks

After thirty years of working in various roles, first building software products, and later supporting teams doing the same, I have come to realize how much I depend on others. There is nothing I do that doesn’t rely on the work of others, from the tools I use—my laptop, desk, lamp, chair, etc.—to the technology—the operating systems, programming languages, infrastructure, data centers, etc.—to the organizations—engineering teams, managers, investors, company owners, etc.--and more. Nothing in this world comes solely from oneself; all that we do is dependent on the innovation and industry of others; decades, hundreds and even thousands of years of effort. Can you name one thing that came solely from you? Yet, we all contribute in some fashion, at times discouraged, but mostly facilitated, by those around us.

**Discouraged:** The corporate environment is set up to be competitive. We compete for scarce resources. At its core, this competitive environment and human nature run contrary to the ideals of collaboration and long-term thought. Even the best organizations, which thrive as they grow, tend to degrade as market share decreases. When you are part of this trend, you can either leave, hide or compete. I have spent more time than I would like to admit navigating hostile relationships, documenting my actions, preparing contingencies and counterpoints, and weathering environments that are breaking down. There are many reasons people choose to remain employed at a company that is entering a death spiral. These are often rational choices--or a lack of choices--and should not be trivialized, even when departure can be life changing. I still remember the feeling of lightness, after five years, when I walked out of the door on my last day at what I felt was one of these companies.  Yet, despite the environment, I have been supported by the colleagues, and there were many, that were still able to remain focused on creating something great.

**Facilitated:** Companies with prospects, that are making money or building something promising, can have the opposite effect. Employees are encouraged to collaborate, ideate, and innovate. This is the ideal situation when everyone is working towards a common goal and, although rarely stated, there is anticipation of rewards. In any endeavor, I have felt the most optimistic when I am working towards a goal or an outcome. This was true in school and remains true in the workplace. Worried about the sustainability of one of my positions, I went to interview at a dying company. The office was mostly empty and quiet; when I returned to my current company, the contrast was startling. My colleagues were working together, gathered in meeting rooms and around whiteboards, planning and designing new features. In this environment, I decided to stay.  And so did most everyone else.

In both of these situations, and those in between, there is one common feature: I am part of a whole. Whatever my contribution, it was nothing without the people who would pick up an idea, modify, attenuate, amplify, trim, and turn the conversation into something tangible—product features, software that could be demonstrated, tested, documented, and delivered. My colleagues, over the years, have changed; none of us seems to stay in one place long. But nothing that I have done would have been possible without them. This is the dependent nature of what we do—the otherness that transforms the nothing of ideas into the something that may one day serve as a dependency for others.  And for those who were there, all I can say, is thank you. 
