---
layout: post
title: Great product managers make great decisions
tags: [decisions, makers, managers]
---

The role of product manager can vary between companies, products, and teams, so how do you prepare for this role?  I have seen successful product managers that come from a variety of backgrounds, and each individual brings different characteristics and skills that contribute to their success.  Given this variety, I believe the most important ability for the role is the ability to make great decisions.  As a product manager, you frequently encounter tradeoffs, questions, blocks, and ambiguous situations which require decisions, thus the ability to make great decisions is a fundamental skill.  Are great decisions correct decisions?  Not always.  To always be right is certainly beyond my capacity; the expectation would likely be debilitating; and incorrect decisions play their part in the learning process anyway.  Instead, great decisions are those that are timely, aligned, and effective.

**Great decisions are timely**

Whether a decision is timely or not depends on the situation:  In fact, some decisions evolve and some are made in the moment.  An example of the first might be the decision on the question:  What, if anything, should we build?  In most cases for new product development, you need to decide if the problem is worth solving.  This type of decision requires time for discovery and analysis, you may need to weigh costs and benefits, and you may change your mind each step of the way.  For the latter, decisions that are made in the moment, an example might be what navigation flow makes the most sense for the user?  While these decisions should be guided by the goal of the product, they are often needed as the parts of the solution materialize, when you discover the path the user takes is dead-end, and you have an engineering team waiting for your feedback.  There are even decisions that ought to be postponed.  For example, you may get immediate feedback from one stakeholder for a change but additional feedback may negate this request.  In this case it is worthwhile to wait.  In all of these examples, what is considered timely depends on the situation but, while there is variety, the timing of the decision is an important quality that defines whether the decisions was great or not.

**Great decisions are aligned**

Alignment is easy to conceptualize and difficult to realize, especially when answering to stakeholders who may have different agendas, goals, and drivers.  For these and other reasons, “decision by committee” rarely results in good, much less great, decisions.  In general, the best decisions are informed by those closest to the problem.  For a new product, this often requires collaboration between the product manager, designer, and engineers.  Engineers are often the ones best placed to provide the details and options needed for a great decision.  Once you have made a decision, if the decision affects the stakeholders, it is good practice to communicate the decision, and the reason for the decision, especially to those that will experience the results.  Since not all decisions are popular, it is good to include any benefits, it is also good to keep an open mind:  It may be that, even when your stakeholders are not close to the problem, they may have information that could change your mind.  It is also not necessary to communicate every decision to everyone since this can be noise:  Who needs to know is yet another decision you need to make.

**Great decisions are effective**

Lastly, for a decision to be great, it should have some type of effect, otherwise why was it required?  The effect can be positive or negative.  Decisions that result in positive outcomes would be easy to understand, although these rarely, if ever, occur:  If the best choice is so apparent, what would anyone outside of the problem need to decide?  Instead, necessary decisions, due to tradeoffs, will have mixed results.  And, while it may seem counterintuitive, decisions can result in negative results, failures, and flops.  Yet, when no other option is available in order to learn something, it is not impossible to conclude the decision was a great one in the end: We never would have known had we not tried this!

**Conclusion: Information Sources**

When you care about the outcome, decision making is not easy.  It requires an understanding of the problem, tradeoffs, potential paths, and the ability to imagine alternate future states.  But this is an essential requirement of all managers and leaders, including those of us who manage products.  There are many sources of information for making decisions--experience, reading, conversation, even writing can help you work through the process, and making great decisions may require you to use one or all, the decision is up to you.
