---
layout: post
title: Empower yourself empower your team
tags: [empowerment, coding, learning]
---

I once met the owner of the largest construction company in Los Angeles, late at night, in his mansion in the mountains just outside of La Cañada, California.  After a tour of his house, which included pictures of once popular television shows that had been filmed there, we sat in the dining room as he described his career:  How, in his youth, he was a "numbers runner" in a Polish ghetto in Chicago; how he tried his hand at a variety of ventures, learning from each of his failures; and how he started his construction company and eventually attained his present position, from which he would soon retire.  He claimed that he was asked at a groundbreaking to mix a batch of cement, and that he was unable to do it.  He said it had never been important enough to learn how to do the jobs: Instead, he spent his time finding those who did.  Based on his wealth and success, this was powerful testimony.

But after all these years, I find I disagree, at least for my own profession: I believe it is necessary to know how to do the jobs.  Not just how to code, but how to do all of the roles on the team.  This does not mean master all jobs, you do not need a college degree in every discipline.  But, having acted in a variety of roles throughout my career, I see the benefit of understanding each one.  My time writing code taught me how to solve problems and structure solutions; my time testing code taught me the importance of good planning and careful construction; my time as a project manager taught me the value of deadlines and efficiency; and writing documentation taught me the value of having a good story to tell.  This is not to say that I did all roles well.  My ventures into design and marketing had suboptimal results.  But even failure can yield understanding and respect for what others are able to do well.

For the product manager, especially one leading technical teams, the most important skill is knowing how to write code.  This is not an easy endeavor, it takes time, as much as 10 to 20 hours a week.  The time required, in this case, reflects the benefit of the challenge.  Not only do you learn what it takes to build a product, you learn to appreciate what your engineers do, and what obstacles they overcome, in order to deliver working code on time.  And as you begin to understand how to do it, you also learn what you need to do to support the doing.

Of course, you should be realistic:  Unless you plan to fully transition into the role, and further are willing to spend the years required to master the subject, your knowledge and skill will not match that of your most talented engineers.  For most of us, this is a field trip, a lesson in the how, which highlights the importance of your role, which is to empower your team.  And you do this by providing the what:  What are you trying to build, what is the value of the result, and how does this support the strategy.  And you communicate this clearly, and often, using all your skill, and all your past experience.  And then you get out of the way.

Even getting out of the way is not a trivial skill:  It takes practice, experience, and a certain amount of trust to be able to understand how something is done without thinking you can do it better.  Rare is the technical manager that understands how the product is being built yet is able to support the team without interference, even as deadlines approach.  Teams are formed without this role, and products are built, but without direction, communication, management, and support, the team is not empowered, and the resulting product is often a disappointment.  

Your investment in yourself makes the difference in your approach.  You know what needs to be done, you are able to clearly describe the problem, the value, and how it supports the strategy; you are able to anticipate issues, to understand the details of decisions, to "see through things;" you are able to provide support as needed, to step away when not, to give your team the space they need to succeed; you are able to collaborate, to lead, to understand, to articulate, communicate, and coordinate; this starts from empowering yourself, investing in yourself, and this is the most important thing. 
